---
layout: post
title:      "programming health."
date:       2020-10-15 04:40:40 +0000
permalink:  programming_health
---

Getting or even staying healthy while learning to program is not easy for most of us. The willpower, focus, and determination that it takes to successfuly learn to code is well known. What is less talked about is how much learning to code helps decision making, or at the very least how we view issues and possible solutions. We can take virtually any issue and 'code' a solution. What we're really doing is practicing (hopefully) creative critical thinking. I changed the way that I take notes, plan trips to the grocery store, even how I prep my gym bag. As I neared the end of my final project I spent less time using said gym bag and a little too much time eating meals while working at my desk. I started thinking of ways to offset the amount of time I was spending at my desk. I started gaining weight and the covid quaratine wasn't helping. Then I realized that I could program my solution. With a dry erase board I mapped out my current status and options.I found that I had more control over my situation than I thought. By reviewing how i was spending my time I was able to refactor routines and processes to make better use of my time. But eventhough I gave myself back more time that I had expected, I did expect to find/create more time. My surprise was *how* I was able to create time. In the past I've created routines and stuck to them. But most of those routines relied on serious dedication and either perfection or very close to it. But I didn't need to be perfect I needed to be more flexible. I looked at my looming health issue as a function. It didn't need to be perfect, it just needed to be flexible enough to handle the real world. So I got a bigger dry-erase board and starting adding some conditionals. I made a few flexible workflows that gave me more time to program and allowed me to work off all the quarantine ice-cream I've been eating.
